# Accessibility for Computer Scientists

Accessibility in computing is broadly about ensuring that everyone, regardless of ability, context, or situation, is able to effectively use computer technologies. This is incredibly important as computing technologies have become so critical to so much of our lives. A big motivation for the field is thus working to achieve equitable access for people with disabilities. This is a book about accessibliity in computing, but it is unlike any other book on the topic. This book intends to engage a technical audience who is as interested in and motivated by the supremely hard technical challenges that come up in accessibility.

Mike Paciello, one of the originators of  accessibility for the Web and the founder of an incredibly successful accessibility consulting firm (The Paciello Group), once said that there were two reasons that companies sought his services: "Invariably, companies come to me because they've been threatened with a lawsuit or someone, usually the CEO, has a person with disability in their immediate family." In the view of the authors of this book, this somewhat cynical view is remarkably accurate in practice.

This book is advances a third reason: accessibility is an ultimate source of hard problems for computer scientists. This may seem counterintuitive for those who incorrectly see the field as simply "doing good" for people with disabilities, or as checking a box to comply with regulations. As you learn about what is required to make technologies accessible it will become quite obvious that accessibility is ultimately about building the interactive system necessary to augment humans to help us all learn, get more done, and live better lives. The not so hidden ulterior motive of this book is to get the best and brightest computer scientists working on hard problems in computing that are important for achieving these outcomes for everyone.

Access technologists are the ultimate interface hackers. They take existing technology and make it work for people and situations for which it wasn’t designed - they transform visual interfaces into landscapes of sound and touch, they overlay interfaces that people with low dexterity can use on top of interfaces requiring fine motor control, and they turn speech and sound into visual displays. This book teaches how access technology is built to work within the tough technical and human constraints in which it must operate.

As early adopters, people with disabilities have inspired a host of future user interface technologies, e.g., conversational assistants, text-to-speech, speech recognition, optical character recognition, predictive typing, tactile displays, etc. People with disabilities continue to be the first users of next-generation technologies that are gradually adopted widely. This book will not only teach you the deep inner workings of today’s user interface technology, but will also serve as a guide for building the user interfaces of the future.

Accessibility shares a special connection with Artificial Intelligence (AI). The high-level goal of AI is to create machines that can perceive, reason, and understand like humans do; whereas, accessibility is intended to make computing technologies usable regardless of how someones ability to perceive, reason, and understand. AI can thus be an important component in accessibility. Working with AI in this context has great potential for near-term impact, but requires coming to terms with the real capabilities of the technology. Errors matter, and the type of errors a system exhibits can matter a lot (and may even be harmful). Machine learning leverages patterns in data to create systems that appear to be intelligent. People with disabilities are often outliers in such data, and so can be especially susceptible to problems with biased datasets that do not include them. Even representative datasets can nevertheless lead to models that produce unfair outcomes. And, so, accessibility is a near-term window into the challenges and promise of AI with which we will all soon be confronted.

This book is designed to be consumed in two different ways. The first is as a straightforward and comprehensive overview of accessibility from a technical point of view. It introduces the different technology used in accessibility, talks about who it is useful for, what is important for constructing that technology, and what challenges remain for making it better. The book asssumes familiarity with computer science fundamentals, but does not assume that the reader knows much about accessibility prior to reading this book. When appropriate, pointers to books that cover rich related areas in accessibility (disability studies, human-computer interaction, etc.) are provided. The second way this book is intended to be used is as a source for modules to be included in courses focused on other areas of computer science. Accessibility permeates computer science topics, and each area of computer science can be related back to hard problems in accessibility. To that end, most of the chapters in this book have been created and organized so that they can be directly mapped onto courses throughout the computer science curriculum.

Including accessibilty topics throughout the computer science curriculum makes clear that regardless of what area we work in, the fundamental motivation is to make computing technology for people to improve the lives of people. Sometimes seeing topics through the lens of someone somewhat different that you (e.g., a person with disaibility) can make that easier to see. Reading this book and completing the exercises contained within it will prepare the reader generally to work on interactive systems, and will provide special preparation to join the burgeoning ranks of accessibility professionals in computing. It will also allow the reader to better connect whatever area of computer science they choose to work on to hard and real problems in the world through accessibility.

We hope that as you read this book you experience some of the excitement relating to both people and technology that the authors have felt working in this area for the past decades. And, when you finish, we encourage you to take what you've learned, solve the hard problems, and make the world more acccessible for all!